.\" witnessd - Cryptographic Authorship Witnessing
.TH WITNESSD 1 "January 2025" "witnessd" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
witnessd \- cryptographic authorship witnessing system
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B witnessd
.I command
.RI [ options ]
.RI [ arguments ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B witnessd
is a cryptographic authorship witnessing system that creates tamper-evident
proof of document creation over time. It uses Verifiable Delay Functions (VDF),
Merkle Mountain Ranges (MMR), and Ed25519 signatures to prove that content
was authored incrementally by a human.
.PP
The system proves:
.IP \(bu 2
Content states form an unbroken cryptographic chain
.IP \(bu 2
Minimum time elapsed between commits (via VDF)
.IP \(bu 2
Real keystrokes occurred over time (jitter evidence)
.IP \(bu 2
Your signed declaration of the creative process
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B init
Initialize witnessd in the current directory. Creates the ~/.witnessd
directory structure, generates an Ed25519 signing key, and sets up
default configuration.
.TP
.BI "commit " file " [-m " message ]
Create a checkpoint for a file. Computes a content hash, links it to
the previous checkpoint, and generates a VDF proof of elapsed time.
.TP
.BI "log " file
Show checkpoint history for a file, including timestamps, content hashes,
and VDF-proven time between commits.
.TP
.BI "export " file " [-tier " tier "] [-o " output ]
Export an evidence packet with cryptographic proofs and your signed
declaration of the creative process. Tiers: basic, standard, enhanced, maximum.
.TP
.BI "verify " "file|evidence.json"
Verify a checkpoint chain or evidence packet. Checks hash links,
VDF proofs, signatures, and jitter evidence.
.TP
.BI "presence " action
Manage presence verification sessions. Actions: start, stop, status, challenge.
Presence verification proves you were at the keyboard during writing.
.TP
.BI "track " action " [" file ]
Track keyboard activity for enhanced evidence. Actions: start, stop, status,
list, export. Records keystroke counts and timing jitter (NOT key values).
.TP
.B calibrate
Calibrate VDF performance for this machine. Measures SHA-256 hashing speed
to establish accurate time bounds.
.TP
.B status
Show witnessd status and configuration, including signing key, VDF
calibration, active chains, and TPM availability.
.TP
.B version
Show version information.
.TP
.B help
Show help message.
.SH BASIC WORKFLOW
.IP 1. 4
.B witnessd init
\- One-time setup
.IP 2. 4
Write your document
.IP 3. 4
.B witnessd commit doc.md -m "first draft"
\- Create checkpoint
.IP 4. 4
Continue writing
.IP 5. 4
.B witnessd commit doc.md -m "revisions"
\- More checkpoints
.IP 6. 4
.B witnessd export doc.md
\- Export evidence when done
.IP 7. 4
.B witnessd verify evidence.json
\- Verify evidence packet
.SH ENHANCED WORKFLOW
For stronger evidence with keystroke tracking:
.IP 1. 4
.B witnessd track start doc.md
\- Start tracking daemon
.IP 2. 4
Write your document
.IP 3. 4
.B witnessd track status
\- Check keystroke count
.IP 4. 4
.B witnessd commit doc.md -m "..."
\- Creates checkpoint with jitter chain
.IP 5. 4
.B witnessd track stop
\- Stop tracking
.IP 6. 4
.B witnessd export doc.md -tier standard
\- Export with jitter evidence
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.witnessd/
Main data directory
.TP
.I ~/.witnessd/config.json
Configuration file with VDF parameters
.TP
.I ~/.witnessd/signing_key
Ed25519 private signing key (mode 0600)
.TP
.I ~/.witnessd/signing_key.pub
Ed25519 public key
.TP
.I ~/.witnessd/chains/
Checkpoint chains for tracked documents
.TP
.I ~/.witnessd/sessions/
Presence verification sessions
.TP
.I ~/.witnessd/tracking/
Keystroke tracking sessions
.SH PRIVACY
The keystroke tracking feature counts keystrokes but does NOT capture which
keys are pressed. This is NOT a keylogger. Only event counts and timing
are recorded.
.SH EVIDENCE TIERS
.TP
.B basic
Checkpoint chain + declaration only
.TP
.B standard
Adds presence sessions + keystroke jitter evidence
.TP
.B enhanced
Adds TPM hardware attestation
.TP
.B maximum
All available evidence layers
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B WITNESSD_HOME
Override the default ~/.witnessd directory
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success
.TP
.B 1
Error occurred
.SH EXAMPLES
Initialize and create first checkpoint:
.PP
.RS
.nf
$ witnessd init
$ witnessd calibrate
$ witnessd commit paper.tex -m "Initial draft"
.fi
.RE
.PP
Export evidence with keystroke tracking:
.PP
.RS
.nf
$ witnessd track start paper.tex
$ # ... write for several hours ...
$ witnessd commit paper.tex -m "Final version"
$ witnessd track stop
$ witnessd export paper.tex -tier standard -o paper.evidence.json
.fi
.RE
.PP
Verify someone else's evidence:
.PP
.RS
.nf
$ witnessd verify submission.evidence.json
.fi
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR witnessctl (1)
.SH BUGS
Report bugs at https://github.com/writerslogic/witnessd/issues
.SH AUTHOR
David Condrey
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2024-2026. Licensed under the Apache License 2.0.
